chore(blog): add release notes for 2.3 release (#512)
asyncapi/website: pages/blog/release-notes-2.3.0.md

## Channels are now optional

Related to the above change, and also in support of enabling greater flexibility in how AsyncAPI documents are structured and reused, `channels` are no longer a required section.

This change makes it easier, for example, to have an AsyncAPI document that only contains reusable component definitions.

For example, you could now have a document like this, which you use solely to hold reusable components for use in other documents.

```yaml
asyncapi: 2.3.0
info:
  description: Dictionary for our definitions
servers:
  production:
    $ref: '#/components/servers/myserver'
components:
  servers:
    myserver:
      url: "http://localhost:5000/ws"
      protocol: ws
  channels:
    myChannel:
      description: "mychannel"
    myOtherChannel:
      description: "another channel"
```

This could be then used in other documents, like:
```yaml
asyncapi: 2.3.0
info:
  description: My awesome service API
servers:
  myserver:
    $ref: 'dictionary.yaml#/components/servers/myserver'
channels:
  mychannel1:
    $ref: 'dictionary.yaml#/components/channels/myChannel'

>   mychannel1:

Reviewer: Hey @dalelane ,

Sorry maybe it's my misunderstanding here, but is `mychannel1` meant to be twice here for your channels example?

Author: nope - nice catch, thanks :)

Author: ```suggestion
  mychannel2:
```

    $ref: 'dictionary.yaml#/components/channels/myOtherChannel'
```

For more detail, see the [Github issue where this change was discussed](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/661).

## New protocol bindings

The specification is now extended to support another custom protocol through the bindings feature:

Solace, thanks to [Michael Davis](https://github.com/damaru-inc).
For more details, check out this [pull request](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/666) and [binding definition](https://github.com/asyncapi/bindings/tree/master/solace).

## Other enhancements

Regular expressions are now Unicode-compliant. This enhancement to the specification from [Sergio Moya](https://www.linkedin.com/in/smoya) means that regular expressions (found in `pattern` and `patternProperties` fields) are now Unicode-compliant (according to ECMA-262).

This improves compatibility with some JSON Schema parsers. For more details, check out the [pull request](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec-json-schemas/pull/145).

> 

Reviewer 2: In light of https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/696 I'm suggesting adding a following deprecation section:

```
## Deprecations

We're deprecating `Channel Item Object` `$ref` field starting from 2.3 version. The plan is to remove the `$ref` field 
from `Channel Item Object` in 3.x major version and allow `Reference Object` to be used wherever the `Channel Item Object` is defined.
```

---
title: AsyncAPI Spec 2.3.0 Release Notes
date: 2022-01-10T10:00:00+01:00
type: Communication
tags:
  - Specification
  - Release Notes
cover: /img/posts/release-notes-2.2.0/cover.webp
authors:
  - name: Dale Lane

>     photo: /img/avatars/questionmark.webp

Reviewer 3: it is intentional, right?

To allow for more flexibility in how AsyncAPI documents are structured and enable content to be reused, `servers` and `channels` can now be defined as reusable components.

For example:

```yaml
servers:
  production:
    $ref: '#/components/servers/myserver'
channels:
  some/events:
    $ref: '#/components/channels/myChannel'
components:
  servers:
    myserver:
      url: "http://localhost:5000/ws"
      protocol: ws
  channels:
    myChannel:
      description: "mychannel"
```

This new feature was contributed by [Sergio Moya](https://www.linkedin.com/in/smoya). For more detail, see this [pull request](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/665) and the [Github issue where this change was discussed](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/660).

## Channels are now optional

Related to the above change, and also in support of enabling greater flexibility in how AsyncAPI documents are structured and reused, `channels` are no longer a required section.

This change makes it easier, for example, to have an AsyncAPI document that only contains reusable component definitions.

For example, you could now have:

```yaml

> PLACEHOLDER - asyncapi doc A without channels

Reviewer 4: We could use something like:

```yaml
asyncapi: 2.3.0
info:  
  description: Dictionary for all definitions of mycompany.com
components:  
  servers: 
    myserver:
      url: "http://localhost:5000/ws"
      protocol: was
  channels:
    myChannel1:
      description: "mychannel1"
    myChannel2:
      description: "mychannel2"
```

And then

```yaml
asyncapi: 2.3.0
info:  
  description: My awesome service API
servers: 
  myserver:
    $ref: 'dictionary.yaml#/components/servers/myserver'
channels:
  mychannel1:
    $ref: 'dictionary.yaml#/components/channels/mychannel1'
```

This new feature was contributed by [Sergio Moya](https://www.linkedin.com/in/smoya). For more detail, see this [pull request](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/665) and the [Github issue where this change was discussed](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/660).

## New protocol bindings

The specification is now extended to support another custom protocol through the bindings feature:

Solace, thanks to [Michael Davis](https://github.com/damaru-inc).
For more details, check out this [pull request](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/666) and [binding definition](https://github.com/asyncapi/bindings/tree/master/solace).

## Other enhancements

Regular expressions are now Unicode-compliant. This enhancement to the specification from [Sergio Moya](https://www.linkedin.com/in/smoya) means that regular expressions (found in `pattern` and `patternProperties` fields) are now Unicode-compliant (according to ECMA-262).

This improves compatibility with some JSON Schema parsers. For more details, check out the [pull request](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec-json-schemas/pull/145).

## Deprecations

> The `$ref` field in [Channel Item Object](#https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.3.0#channelItemObject) is deprecated from AsyncAPI 2.3.0, in favour of using [Reference Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.3.0#referenceObject) instead.

Reviewer 2: Hi @dalelane,

Would it be possible to rephrase this section? I've read it couple of times and the take away (in my understanding) is that the `Channel Item`.`$ref` field is deprecated and `Reference Object` should be used instead.

That's actually not the case. IMHO we should emphasize that though the `Channel Item`.`$ref` is now deprecated, it's still the only mechanism for referencing Channel Item Objects. `Reference Object` cannot be used in 2.3 version of spec to reference `Channel Item Object` as it would introduce ambiguity described in https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/607#issuecomment-1018318910. Basically we're deprecating something that doesn't have other preferred way of substitution until 3.0 version.

In 3.0, the `Channel Object`.`$ref` will be dropped and the `Reference Object` will be allowed to be used wherever the `Channel Item Object` can. But this is not the case for version 2.3.

Author: absolutely - thanks so much for checking it over and clarifying 👍

## Deprecations

The `$ref` field in [Channel Item Object](#https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.3.0#channelItemObject) is now deprecated from AsyncAPI 2.3.0.

The current plan is that the `$ref` field will be removed from **Channel Item Object** in AsyncAPI 3.0, and replaced with [Reference Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.3.0#referenceObject).

For more detail, you can see the [discussion about this issue in Github](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/607).

## Tooling support

The following official AsyncAPI tools are already updated to support 2.3.0 version of the specification:
- JSON Schema that supports validation of AsyncAPI documents is updated in [this](https://github.com/asyncapi/asyncapi-node) repository. Also **@asyncapi/specs** package has been updated on NPM to version 2.13.0, and it contains the 2.3.0 JSON Schema.
- [JavaScript Parser](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/) uses latest **@asyncapi/specs** package and can be used to parse and validate 2.3.0 documents. Upgrade to 1.14.0 version.

> - [HTML template](https://github.com/asyncapi/html-template) uses the latest **@asyncapi/react-component** package. Upgrade to 0.23.0 version.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [HTML template](https://github.com/asyncapi/html-template) uses the latest **@asyncapi/react-component** package. Upgrade to 0.24.7 version.
```

- [JavaScript Converter](https://github.com/asyncapi/converter-js/) enables conversion from any AsyncAPI version into the 2.3.0 version of the spec. Upgrade to 0.7.0 version.

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- [Modelina](https://github.com/asyncapi/modelina/) now also accepts AsyncAPI documents valid against the 2.3.0 version of the spec. Upgrade to 1.46.0 version.
```

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion 
 - [Generator](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator/) uses the latest @asyncapi/parser package, so while generating output, it can validate 2.1.0 documents. Upgrade to 1.9.0 version.

```

> Last but not least is the AsyncAPI Playground. Check new playground that uses latest HTML template and Markdown template with [this example](https://playground.asyncapi.io/?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/asyncapi/spec/v2.3.0/examples/websocket-gemini.yml).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Last but not least is the AsyncAPI Studio. Check new studio with [this example](https://studio.asyncapi.com/?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/asyncapi/spec/v2.3.0/examples/websocket-gemini.yml).
```

We are "slowly" moving from the playground to the studio :)
